I'm B pan welcome we start in the gazan
city of KH yunes where authorities say a
school Sheltering children has been
damaged after an Israeli air
strike video obtained by the Reuters
news agency shows the moment of impact
sending sparks flying and clouds of
smoke belowing into the night sky
Witnesses say the blast shuttered
windows and tore through walls in the
neighborhood in the neighboring building
a school run by the UN Refugee agency
unra currently housing displaced people
a resident said people Sheltering there
had received a call moments earlier
warning them of the strike giving them
just enough time to get to safety there
are no reports of
casualties and after 8 and a half months
of war in Gaza Israel still says it
plans to destroy Hamas but there was a
remarkable quote from the spokesman of
the Israeli Army in an interview Admiral
Daniel hagari told Israel's Channel 13
broadcaster and I quote to say that we
are going to make Hamas disappear is to
throw sand in people's eyes if we don't
provide an alternative in the end we
will be left with Hamas he further said
Hamas is an ideology we cannot eliminate
an ideology unquote now Hamas is
classified as a terrorist group by many
Western countries in addition to its
military wing it has governed Gaza since
2007 and is a political Force as well
let's take a look at what's left of the
group and the danger it could still pose
to
Israel Hamas Fighters firing rockets at
Israel from Southern Lebanon where it
cooperates with other militant groups
Air Aid alarms are frequent in Tel Aviv
well within those Rockets range this is
something Israel's military wanted to
stop with its war in Gaza yet it's still
happening there are no precise
independently verified figures available
about hamas's strength in numbers of
Fighters or its stocks of weapons Israel
estimates that Hamas had more than
30,000 Fighters at the time of its
Terror attacks on October 7th last year
and that between 12 and 14,000 have been
killed in fighting since
then however Hamas may be able to fill
its ranks with new recruits
quickly Israel has also seized stores of
Weaponry including Rock rocket launchers
missiles and guns an Israeli military
analyst told DW earlier this year that
70 to 80% of hamas's Arsenal had been
captured or
destroyed but about half of hamas's
tunnels are estimated to still be intact
allowing the group to hide regroup and
potentially rearm itself through its
smuggling
Network then there's the group's
leadership which has largely survived
Yaya sinir the group's leader in Gaza
still runs operations from hiding and
the group's political leader ismaa is in
Qatar the leader of the military Wing
Muhammad da is thought to be hiding in
Gaza as well Israel did Kill Dave's
Deputy Marwan Isa but that is the
closest it's come to taking out the
senior
leadership as Israel reckons with a war
that could go on for months to come
pressure for a ceasefire is growing
otherwise its forces may be
overstretched and less able to react to
other threats
[Music]
let's get more on from Middle East
expert Daniel Gall who joins me now from
Tokyo Daniel good to see you Israeli
military spokesman Daniel hagari says
and I quote to say that we are going to
make Hamas disappear is to throw sand in
people's eyes unquote what has the
Israeli military been doing in Gaza if
not trying to make Hamas
disappear yeah um the problem is that
sometimes numbers become meaningless
when there's no political strategy and I
think what Daniel hagari and also uh
Chief of Staff her Levi wanted to say
and they've been trading let's say uh
unfriendly words even with the Netanyahu
government for a few days now is if
there's no political strategy the
military cannot be expected to achieve
political goals and the future of of of
the administration of the Gaza Strip is
a political not a military issue Hamas
has a military Wing but uh the problem
is that Israeli forces upon uh like
command of uh of their political
leadership targeted everyone who was
affiliated with Hamas um and that could
that pertains also to people who do
policing and to uphold Administration in
a certain degree of public order so if
you destroy all of this then you can say
of course you have killed many Hamas
people and some estimates like let's say
optimistic cynically said estimates of
the Israeli armed forces that they had
killed up to 15,000 Hamas members that
they had killed like half of the B
commanders of the 24 battalions but
nevertheless there is still uh there is
still an infrastructure in place and
there's still a lot of people affiliated
with Hamas so if you don't have a
political strategy how to deal with this
issue other than military then of course
this is doomed to fail and then what we
see is that political leadership tends
to accuse the generals of weak
performance um I think the Israeli
forces are not to be blamed for that at
least the IDF was working on the
government's orders are you saying that
the government and the IDF are not on
the same page anymore
well there are clear signs for this you
can you can see that in the past you
know Israel has a democratic system and
a democratic Army in a sense so though
the armed forces have been heavily
infiltrated and undermined by nonsecular
right-wing extremist uh forces and that
also of course has an impact on the
General on the leadership in the Army
the Army tries to tries to still you
know keep some reason here in the place
and though the Army has been accused I
think rightfully in part of not exerting
the the the the the the necessary
control of also allowing war crimes to
happen um the Army tried to achieve a
military goal which is the destruction
of Hamas now we even see that the Army
is no longer uh pursuing the goal of
liberating the hostages at least that
might be the task of a few Special
Forces of the Border Police uh but not
uh the the the core uh let's say Target
of the Army operation in the south of
the Gaza Strip and I see I see a lot of
disagreement between the netan
government and the Army but the only
problem is netan is is is in this
situation willing to accuse everyone of
treason to attack everyone around him
even those that have been serving him uh
quite committedly Daniel hagari was also
talking about providing an alternative
to Hamas uh in the end is this the
military also saying that this is
something that the government is
ignoring well it seems so um let's
remember that uh Minister of Defense yav
galand said that weeks ago and he cannot
be accused of being you know ill loyal
to the government he was like uh
hardcore he was really like um like like
adamant when it comes to the destruction
of Hamas but he told netan and he said
it publicly you have to come up with a
plan and you have to probably also reach
out to the Arab states if you want to
settle this issue and you have to do it
while the war is ongoing it doesn't make
sense to hope for an end of the war and
then deal with the issue uh you had um
opposition politician Benny guns who
left uh the war cabinet a few days ago
and ultimately the war cabinet was
resolved upon an ultimatum that had
expired that he had said to Netanyahu
asking him come up with a political plan
nanyan netan has done nothing of that
and of course we hear here and there
scenarios and plans uh like trickling
down but in fact there is no tangible
issue and you cannot expect any Force
let alone the Arabs to join and to
support you on whatever Endeavor it is
to secure the future of the Gaza Strip
if you don't have any political scenario
for the future of it and then you have
members of the government who say we
need to resettle the Gaza Strip we need
to send uh you know establish
settlements in the Gaza Strip and Annex
it forever and of course that is not
very encouraging to anyone who wants to
play a conducive role to peace and
security Middle East expert Daniel gak
there thanks so much for talking to us
today I joined here in the studio by Gil
musano he is the CEO of midv that's the
Israeli Institute of uh for regional
Regional foreign policy uh Gil let me
just quote here to say that we are going
to make Hamas disappears to throw sand
in people's eyes how important is this
statement coming from uh one of the
Israeli military's uh most important
spokes people indeed quite a rare
expression of protest coming from the
professional level in Israel from the
IDF in many ways expressing or
reflecting a great frustration by the
IDF we are talking about the idea of
reaching a certain level of military
achievement when it comes to reducing
Hamas military capability but with a
clear understanding that from now now on
the real operation of defeating Hamas is
more of a political
diplomatic Mission than a a military
Mission Al together
but many many people have said that from
the beginning you cannot completely
destroy Hamas and yet the Israeli
government and also the military has
said we will destroy Hamas doesn't all
this come a bit late well I think that
right now when we speaking about
defeating Hamas we need to speak
specifically about the goal of H
basically removing Hamas as a governing
unit in Gaza on the day after and
therefore the major discussion is about
an alternative creating alternative to
Hamas and this is a political discussion
that mainly refer to the return of the
PA now the Israeli government because of
its own political limitation has been
unable or unwilling to even discuss the
option Netanyahu was talking about not
replacing hastan with fatan with the
movement that abuan is leading at the
moment but when we speak about defeating
Kamas there's also a very uni unique
opportunity at the moment because it's
also about defeating the purposes of the
7th of October Massacre by Hamas and
that was mainly about stopping Israeli
Saudi normalization so the chance is
there right now but again with a
political Paralysis on the Israeli the
current Israeli government hands you
cannot really move to the second to the
next phase and I think that's mainly the
goal of the agari statement to actually
approach the Israeli public in order to
create pressure on the political
leadership to create any kind of a
political directive for the day after so
what has then the this offensive in Gaza
this war in Gaza what has it achieved
well currently I think that you can you
can discuss the reduction of Kamas
military cap capabilities I think the
last asset military from a military
point of view was to take over the
Philadelphia line the specific Buffa
Zone separating Egypt and the Gaza strep
the main site of smuggling of weapons uh
so the military whatever the military
could actually achieve uh to reduce the
the the military force of Hamas was
achieved but the military action has
somewhat exhausted itself and we also
have to relate to the fact that
everything that happens in Gaza right
now connects to the major threat at the
moment or in the north of a war between
healah and between Israel now Hamas
Hamas is more than just militants uh
with guns um it also was the whole Civic
administration of the Gaza Strip uh
what's going to happen to that well I
think there's a discussion today about
differentiating or somewhat learning
some lessons from the US experience in
Iraq in other places and providing some
kind of an amnesty to the civil servants
understanding that we are talking about
governing units and separating the
so-called suicidal wing of sinir from
the civil servant servant and so on but
all of it is part of a reconstruction
process that could only be initiated if
it is connected to a broader political
initiative we spoke about who's going to
govern Hamas in the day govern Gaza in
the day after instead of Hamas we are
talking about a multinational Force the
involvement of regional actors they
won't come and unless it's with
Palestinian invitation that's what we
are hearing for them so it's all in the
end this entire crucial reconstruction
phase connects with the broader
political initiative now you have called
Israel's handling of the Palestinian
issue a strategic asset for Iran can you
elaborate on that oh indeed I think that
you know we we always used to speak
especially in Israel about which threat
is more severe for Israel future the
Palestinian or the Iranian and we were
all wrong they are interconnected when
we speak about areas of chaos if we are
not moving forward reconstruction in
Gaza the great starvation and
destruction that we see today in Gaza
the Iranians has excelled themselves
quote unquote in entering chaos in Yemen
in Syria in the civil war in Iraq and
Gaza in this situation can provide them
with the best conditions unless we
create something else and we also relate
to the offer made by President Biden to
build to build an alliance of
moderates mainly to contain Iranian
growing a regional influence that can
only work again if we create some kind
of a common ground with the Palestinian
issue so you see how those two topics
are intertwined and the current
paralysis by the Israel government
serves the Iranian strategic goals Al
together thank you very much gilana
there of the Israeli Institute for
regional foreign policies thank you for
sharing your Insight and I'm now joined
by Andreas kek from the school of
security studies at King's College
London now what's your assessment of the
state of Hamas military structures at
this point in the Israeli campaign
well I mean to to be honest it's kind of
meaningless to discuss how many fighters
have been killed how many tunnels are
still intact because as the idea
spokesperson rightly said this is an
idea it's a movement and that IDE idea
of armed resistance has been fueled by
the war so the war in many ways has been
counterproductive the estimates that the
US intelligence has published suggests
that maybe around a third of the tunnels
were destroyed but we're looking at 500
km of tunnels a third of them being
destroyed means it's not really
strategically viable in terms of making
a difference on the ground and in terms
of estimates of how many fighters were
killed we're looking at uh 30% 35% of
Hamas Fighters but obviously at the same
time we've seen Hamas being able to
restock most of its fighting battalions
with new recruits and hence here is
where the problem comes in I think
Israel has fundamentally misunderstood
the source of power for Hamas which is
the idea of armed resistance and while
Israel has failed to provide a strategic
alternative to Hamas politically um it
has created a thrust and a kind of a
polar attraction to the movement and to
the idea of armed resistance because the
desperation of people particular in Gaza
who've been hit you know entire
generations of people have been
annihilated half of infrastructure has
been destroyed in Gaza that has fueled
the kind of Attraction of the idea of
armed resistance because people have no
alternative and if before the 7th of
October Israel had any sort of idea or
any Prospect of potentially uh working
with Palestinians that Prospect has now
disappeared Palestinians will now when
left with a choice between Israel and
Hamas will site with the Hamas not
because they like it but because Israel
is the worst of two choices now how
unified is Hamas are there differences
between the leadership in Gaza and
leaders in Exel for
example oh absolutely uh so we've seen
that from the beginning the leaders in
particular in Katan and also in Egypt um
those and or in Lebanon have very little
in terms of popular support on the
ground because they've been out of the
picture for many years they have been
living quite comfortably while the
leadership on the ground particular D
and sinir have been embedded more or
less within the population on the ground
even if they're underground um but for
the most part they have actually
provided a a degree of attraction to to
people in in in Gaza in a way that
people in Exile have not and that's kind
of the difficulty so uh negotiating with
Hamas in qat for example doesn't
necessarily mean that what is agreed
will be one toone uh translated to
what's going on on the ground because
there's been disruption within the
movement um as a whole now you've
touched upon this but how much support
does Hamas really have among the
civilian population in uh in Gaza and
also in the West
Bank so here again very difficult to
have opinion polls in times of War uh
what we do see is a slightly different
picture between the West Bank and and
Gaza obviously people in Gaza are
suffering
um extremely I mean this is one of the
worst if not the worst humanarian
situation anywhere in the world um and
while it is being caused by Israeli
bombs and Israeli destruction there are
a lot of people in Gaza who are saying
the root cause of that at least uh is
the 7th of October for now um and uh as
such there's a lot of people in Gaza who
are blaming Hamas on the other side you
have people in the West Bank who are not
suffering that much at the moment at
least from Israeli occupation and they
feel the only way to fight back is to
support Hamas in uh in in EN countering
what they see as Israel aggression and
in in Gaza the pictures again it's it's
slightly different so I would say that
Hamas is losing some support but again
it's a people in Palestine are left with
a choice between a pest and Kera between
Israel and Hamas and since Israel hasn't
offered a viable solution out of
desperation and that would have been an
opportunity here an alternative to Hamas
people will sight with Hamas because
they have no other choice now if the
total defeat of Hamas is not possibly uh
not possible what is the alternative for
the IDF
then well the IDF is in a difficult
situation and we're seeing increasing
ruptures here between the IDF leadership
and the political leadership in
Jerusalem um this right-wing government
of bib Netanyahu is not pursuing a
viable political strategy it's relying
entirely on the military and the IDF is
now coming out more and more saying
saying there is no military solution to
the problem we need a strategic Pathway
to self-governance to provide
Palestinians with a viable solution to
self-governance not just in the West
Bank but also in Gaza and the pal and
and the Israeli government is doing
everything to undermine this by you know
empowering settlers by empowering Now
new governance structures Israeli
government structures in the West Bank
that further undermine the Palestinian
Authority so what needs to happen is
Israel needs to think about a strategic
solution it needs to attack the root
cause of the conflict which is
occupation which is the the lack of a
viable solution and Pathway to a
two-state solution um and that has to
fundamentally Israel has to
fundamentally change its its approach to
that both means both ways and also its
ends I don't see that happening because
netan in particular and his right-wing
government have no real interest to
provide Palestinians with any incentive
they want to pursue a politic of uh a
policy of Iron Fist and that is going to
fail Andreas Creek there King's College
London thank you very much